---
title: dotfiles 101 - git
excerpt: Git is an immensely popular version control system. In order to be more effective while using it, it can help to set up your configuration properly.
tags: ['tech']
date: 2014-08-16 15:42:29
---

*First off I just want to apologise for this article taking so long to appear,
but I've been really busy with a new job and also putting off finishing this
one... but here it is - finally!*

---

This article is part of a series; [the first part](/dotfiles-101) gives a
general introduction about dotfiles and why it's a good idea to maintain your
own, [the second part](/dotfiles-101-bash) goes into more depth with regards to
bash.

In this part we'll look at fleshing out your git config a bit more.


## Before we start

In the examples I will show you how to modify git's config files directly, but
if you don't like to edit them manually, you can manipulate all the options like
so:

```bash
$ git config --global <option> <value>
```

- `<option>` will have a namespace and a key, e.g., `user.name`
- `<value>` will be, well, the value


## Starting out

There's 3 levels on which git allows you to configure options:

- system -- found at `/etc/gitconfig`
- global -- found at `~/.gitconfig`
- local -- found in a project's `.git/config`

In this article, we'll be changing the **global** options situated in the user's
home directory. Let's go ahead and create it:

```bash
$ touch ~/.gitconfig
```


## So, who are you again?

First off, we'll want to tell git who we are. This information will be used when
you create commits. Since you're using github for your dotfiles repo, you'll
want to use an email address here that is registered with github---this will
help map your name to your github username.


```ini
[user]
	name = Chiel Kunkels
	email = chiel@kunkels.me
```

Since these details are your identity, this is another upside of keeping your
own dotfiles---you'll always have your identity set up and ready to go.


## Ignoring project-agnostic files

A lot of editors and operating systems generate files that are not related to
your project at all. In cases like these you don't really want to stick them in
a project's local `.gitignore`. Not to worry---a solution is nigh!

`core.excludesfile` allows you to specify a global `.gitignore`, let's begin by
specifying it's location:

```ini
[core]
	excludesfile = ~/.gitignore
```

As you can see, this will expect a file in your home directory called
`.gitignore`, but you can put it anywhere and call it whatever you like. I like
consistency so I named it `.gitignore`, and since my config is user-specific, I
keep it in my home directory. Let's crank it open:

```bash
$ vim ~/.gitconfig
```

Since I'm using OS X and vim a lot I've specified 2 files generated by those for
now:

```
.DS_Store
.netrwhist
```

I know there's a bunch more files that you can ignore, but I'll leave it up to
you guys and gals to figure out what you want to ignore. For more information
about ignoring files, check out [github's excellent help article][gitignore].


## Newline settings

Everybody knows (I hope) that various operating systems handle their line
endings differently. Windows uses `\r\n` (carriage-return followed by line feed)
whereas unix just uses `\n` (line feed). This can cause some issues while
handling versions of your files, since technically the files are different. Git
has some settings to handle this, so let's go ahead and add them:

```ini
[core]
	autocrlf = input
	safecrlf = true
```

Since I only develop on OS X and linux, using `input` for the `core.autocrlf`
works well for me since this means, as far as I know, that it uses whatever
character is input by my operating system.

I definitely don't know all there is to know when it comes to line endings and
git, so I'm not going to pretend I do. These options have served me well so far
but if you want to know more, I recommend hopping over to github's help to read
[this article][line-endings].


## Pushing

Depending on your version of git, the default behaviour of `git push` will
differ slightly. In git 1.x it's set to `matching` which means all local
branches that have a branch of the same name on your remote will get pushed.

In git 2.x it defaults to `simple`, meaning it will push to the upstream of your
current branch, with an added safety measure of checking if your branch name is
the same.

Personally, I am not a big fan of either of these behaviours. The `matching`
behavior pushes too much stuff for my liking and the `simple` option restricts
me by not allowing me to call my local and remote branches whatever I please.

```ini
[push]
	default = upstream
```

The `upstream` option gives me the best of both worlds---it pushes the current
branch to it's remote tracked branch, without checking if the name is the same
or anything. Perfect.


## Rebasing

I know that rebasing can be a somewhat controversial subject and that a lot of
people prefer merging, but in my opinion both of these methods have their place
as long as you know what you're doing.

I'll be the first to admit it's a bit of a brainfuck whilst getting used to it,
but once you get past that, it's awesome.

```ini
[branch]
	autosetuprebase = always

[branch "master"]
	rebase = true
```

Basically what these options do is make sure that when you `git pull`, it does
so with `--rebase`. For some, this will be annoying since you won't be able to
pull if you have a dirty working tree, but it will avoid creating useless merge
commits.

I'm personally very pro-keeping-history-relevant, so for me this works out
great, especially when using `git log --graph`, since it won't have lots of
"branches" which have no relevance.


## Aliases

Ahh, aliases... what would would I do without you?

Aliases have, to my mind, two uses: frstly, they can make commands shorter,
saving you some keystrokes and secondly they make the output of these commits a
bit more useful.

Without further ado I'm just gonna spill it:

```ini
[alias]
	b = branch
	t = tag
	d = diff --stat -p -C
	ds = diff --staged --stat -p -C
	ci = commit -v
	co = checkout
	st = status -sb
	wc = whatchanged --abbrev-commit --date=relative --date-order --pretty='format:%Cgreen%h %Cblue%ar %Credby %an%Creset -- %s' -n 45
	ll = log --graph --date=relative --topo-order --pretty='format:%C(yellow)%h%C(yellow)%d %Cblue%ar %Cgreenby %an%Creset -- %s'
	guilt = "!f(){ git log --pretty='format:%an <%ae>' $@ | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn; }; f"
```

As you can see, a few of these commands are simply just for shortening, while
others make the output a bit more... usable. I'm not going to explain what every
single alias does, I suggest you just copy them over and give them a go!


## Merging & diffs

Merging and dealing with diffs are two very common operations in git, so it
makes sense to set that up properly.

```ini
[merge]
	tool = vimdiff

[mergetool]
	prompt = false

[diff]
	renames = true
	tool = vimdiff

[difftool]
	prompt = false
```

The above options will set `vimdiff` as your merge and diff tools, turn off
prompts before showing those tools and show renamed files in diffs; all in all
smoothing out your workflow a bit when dealing with these scenarios.


## Painting rainbows

I FUCKING LOVE BRIGHT COLOURS.

No but seriously, colours on the command line really help distinguish things and
make it a lot easier to parse the information on your screen, which in my
opinion is critical when you're trying to get to grips with the command line.

You can, of course, use whatever colours you want, but here's the way I have
things set up:

```ini
[color]
	ui = auto
	branch = auto
	diff = auto
	status = auto

[color "branch"]
	current = yellow reverse
	local = yellow
	remote = green

[color "diff"]
	meta = blue bold
	frag = magenta bold
	old = red
	new = green

[color "status"]
	added = blue bold
	changed = green bold
	untracked = cyan bold
```

This adds colour to a variety of different outputs from various git commands,
yay!


## In summary, aka TL;DR

Putting things from this article together, should leave you with a config that
looks a little bit like this:

```ini
[user]
	name = Your Name
	email = you@your.name

[core]
	excludesfile = ~/.gitignore
	autocrlf = input
	safecrlf = true

[push]
	default = tracking

[branch]
	autosetuprebase = always

[branch "master"]
	rebase = true

[alias]
	b = branch
	t = tag
	d = diff --stat -p -C
	ds = diff --staged --stat -p -C
	ci = commit -v
	co = checkout
	st = status -sb
	wc = whatchanged --abbrev-commit --date=relative --date-order --pretty='format:%Cgreen%h %Cblue%ar %Credby %an%Creset -- %s' -n 45
	ll = log --graph --date=relative --topo-order --pretty='format:%C(yellow)%h%C(yellow)%d %Cblue%ar %Cgreenby %an%Creset -- %s'
	guilt = "!f(){ git log --pretty='format:%an <%ae>' $@ | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn; }; f"

[merge]
	tool = vimdiff

[mergetool]
	prompt = false

[diff]
	renames = true
	tool = vimdiff

[difftool]
	prompt = false

[color]
	ui = auto
	branch = auto
	diff = auto
	status = auto

[color "branch"]
	current = yellow reverse
	local = yellow
	remote = green

[color "diff"]
	meta = blue bold
	frag = magenta bold
	old = red
	new = green

[color "status"]
	added = blue bold
	changed = green bold
	untracked = cyan bold
```

So there it is - a git config which will hopefully help people on their quest of
conquering git.

`:wq`

[gitignore]: https://help.github.com/articles/ignoring-files
[line-endings]: https://help.github.com/articles/dealing-with-line-endings
