---
title: dotfiles 101
excerpt: There is merit to keeping your very own copy of dotfiles. It makes it easy to keep your development environment consistent even when you reinstall or get a new machine.
tags: ['tech']
date: 2014-04-12 23:55:41
---

When I started working at [Spotify][spotify], I had never used the command line
or git before. I won't lie; I was a little afraid of the command line, with its
black background and walls of text. But it quickly became clear that I would
have to learn to work with it. Every developer had their own VPS to work on and
mounting it over ssh was kinda crappy cause the network was pretty shaky at
times.

Everyone (bar a few, perhaps) seemed to be using either vim or emacs for their
day-to-day work. Walking around the office, looking at people's screens, you
could see them all being immersed in their work, coding across multiple splits,
switching between them with a few keystrokes; it seemed highly efficient, to
say the least!

At this point I decided I would have to change my ways; I used to change editors
on a pretty regular basis, always pouncing on the new ones as they popped up,
mainly cause I had not yet found an editor I was truly comfortable with.

It was time I started using **vim**.

I figured the best approach would be to just dive in, cold turkey, and use
nothing except vim from then on. I approached a colleague and asked if I could
copy his vim config -- since vim isn't exactly known for being the most
user-friendly editor out of the box -- and off I popped!

I'm not gonna lie -- it was painful. I barely got any work done that first week;
my fingers and mind just couldn't seem to get used to the different modes and
commands.

To illustrate: there's a variety of ways to enter insert mode; it took a while
before I fully realised the subtle differences between them and when each of
them is the most efficient choice.

Nowadays, I love the command line. I love git. I love vim. This is all because
of the stuff I learnt at Spotify and all the things that I've learnt since.

From the moment I copied my colleague's vim config, I realised the importance of
configuring my tools properly. From then on, I strived to get the most out of
the tools I used and that it's never a waste of time to research this kinda
stuff.

So, what am I trying to say with this little story?

It's important to configure your tools, making sure you're working in an
environment where you feel both comfortable and confident. That's why I am
writing this article -- to hopefully help others out the same way my
ex-colleagues have helped me.

Initially I was planning to just make a single article about all this, but as I
was writing it, it became quite long, so I've decided to instead split this up
into four articles each focussing on its own topic.

This is the first article in the series, where I'll take you through the basics
of creating your dotfiles home and linking it with a repository. The rest of
the articles will each cover one of the following topics: bash, git and vim.

By the end of the series, you should have the following:

- A useful bash prompt, including display of git branch
- Some useful aliases for bash and git
- Some basic configuration to make vim less terrible


## Make my own dotfiles? Effort...

The "annoying" thing about dotfiles, is that they are personal. No two people
are alike and the same can be said for one's preferences. Because of this,
maintaining your own dotfiles makes sure you remain in full control of your
setup and keeps it free of cruft you don't need.

That doesn't mean it's a bad thing to look at other people's configurations and
steal the bits that you like, that's what I do too, but copying them over into
your own dotfiles will allow you to modify things easily and exactly to your
liking.

There's quite a large community around dotfiles; a lot of developers on github
have their very own dotfiles repo -- these are ideal for finding interesting
bits of code that will make your life easier. On top of that, there's
[dotfiles.github.io][gh-dotfiles] which has a list of popular bootstraps and
frameworks to help you on your way to greatness!

My dotfiles can be found [here][dotfiles].


## Let's dive in

So, now that you know why you should create your own dotfiles, let's get
started. First off you'll need a central repo to store your config. In this
series we'll be using [github][github] since that's what I'm familiar with, but
I'm sure that [bitbucket][bitbucket] is also well up to the task.

First off, you'll want to make a [new repository on github][new-repo]. I'd
suggest just naming it "dotfiles", without any gitignore or license, but that's
ultimately up to you.

Then, create a `.dotfiles` directory in your home directory where you'll keep
the actual files. Once they're stored in there, we'll create symbolic links to
the required files so they are where the operating system expects them. You can
create the directory by typing:

```bash
$ mkdir ~/.dotfiles
```

Then, to finish things off go into the directory, make it into a git repo and
set the appropriate remote:

```bash
$ cd ~/.dotfiles
$ git init
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:chielkunkels/dotfiles.git
```

Of course you'll want to replace `chielkunkels` with your own name.

To finish off today's article, we'll create our .bashrc file and link to it from
our home directory.

```bash
$ touch ~/.dotfiles/.bashrc
$ cd
$ ln -s .dotfiles/.bashrc
```

Depending on your operating system you'll also need to include the bashrc file
in your `~/.profile` or `~/.bash_profile`.

Some OS' come with a `~/.profile` in place which looks for the `~/.bashrc` and
`source`s it if found; if that's not the case, put the following in your
`~/.bash_profile` (create it, if necessary):

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

To finish things off, let's push these changes to our repository:

```bash
$ git push -u origin master
```

Wondering what the `-u` stands for? It sets the upstream of your local branch.
In layman's terms this means telling git which branch on the remote you would
like to synchronise with.

Not doing this would mean that if you want to `git push`, you would always have
to specify which remote + branch you would want to push to (the `origin master`
in the command above). Using the `-u` flag on your first push means that you can
simply use `git push`  without any arguments from then on.


## Concluding

Well then - you've just taken your first steps in maintaining your very own
dotfiles. Feels good, doesn't it? But it doesn't stop here! In the next article
in the series, we'll go about the basic configuration of your bash prompt.

Thanks for reading and until next time.

`:wq`

`:e`: The next article in the series is out, covering more in-depth `bash`
configuration. Check it out [here]({% post_url 2014-04-14-dotfiles-101-bash %}).

[spotify]: https://www.spotify.com/
[gh-dotfiles]: http://dotfiles.github.io/
[dotfiles]: https://github.com/chielkunkels/dotfiles
[github]: https://github.com/
[bitbucket]: https://bitbucket.org/
[new-repo]: https://github.com/new
